Finding a promising solution for high-dimensional functions is a challenging task. Evolutionary algorithms that mimic biological population features are used for this. These algorithms guarantee the following generation's quality. Most evolutionary algorithms can become caught in local minima, resulting in poor solutions. This work introduces the monkeypox optimisation (MO) method, which hijacks bodily cells to solve high-dimensional problems. First, MO starts by trying to attack and penetrate a cell. The notion of virus-to-cell infections does this. Second, after the penetration, MO makes copies of itself more quickly and ensures the copies are much better. This is done by mimicking the notion of cell-to-cell infections. This ensures MO convergence towards a desirable solution. A mathematical model describing the MO algorithm is given. MO is tested against 21 optimisation algorithms utilising IEEE congress of evolutionary computation benchmark functions in different dimensions. Moreover, three engineering optimisation problems are compared to test MO. The results are impressive, with remarkable performance in solving complex problems. Also, the results show that MO can handle different types and sizes of problems while balancing the exploration and exploitation steps. This helped to explain the high ability to escape from local minima with a higher convergence speed than the competitors. Also, MO solved engineering problems better and more reliably than its competitors and the well-known golden values. Friedman and Fisher statistical tests are used to back up these conclusions. In most cases, the results show that the null hypothesis was rejected, which proves that MO differs from its competitors.
